Docs/hobby-notes.md, before:

Need to figure out whether we can use relative abundance measures of OTUs to determine several stability measures. In particular we want to be able to parameterize Lotka-Volterra models of species interactions to assess whether the community is locally stable (in the sense of the eigenvalues) and whether the community has permanence (species maintain positive abundance based on projections from the model). By the approaches that typically require absolute abundances to realtive abundance data we will be able to unlock a tremendous amount of data that has been collected. 

Discovering the identity of keystone taxa in the gut microbial community is imperative to understanding the factors underlying the stability of the microbiome. Prior studies have used networks of co-occurrence and correlations to assign 'keystoneness' to different OTUs. We want to use a novel approach, from the field of economics, called market basket analysis (MBA) to identify the relationships among mcirobial taxa.    

Why do we care about stability?

Commit message:

add paragraph on heath implications

Docs/hobby-notes.md, after:

Need to figure out whether we can use relative abundance measures of OTUs to determine several stability measures. In particular we want to be able to parameterize Lotka-Volterra models of species interactions to assess whether the community is locally stable (in the sense of the eigenvalues) and whether the community has permanence (species maintain positive abundance based on projections from the model). By the approaches that typically require absolute abundances to realtive abundance data we will be able to unlock a tremendous amount of data that has been collected. 

Discovering the identity of keystone taxa in the gut microbial community is imperative to understanding the factors underlying the stability of the microbiome. Prior studies have used networks of co-occurrence and correlations to assign 'keystoneness' to different OTUs. We want to use a novel approach, from the field of economics, called market basket analysis (MBA) to identify the relationships among mcirobial taxa.    

__Why do we care about stability?__

Human Health implications

There is a widespread assumption among microbial biologists studying the human gut microbiome that these communities are relatively stable over long periods of time. Evidence supporting this assumption comes primarily from assessments of the microbial community composition at several time points and noting that the same dominant OTUs appear at each time point. The assumption of stability has been translated into the idea that a stable microbial community is important for maintaining the health of the human host. For example, the invasion by the pathogenic bacteria _Clostridium dificile_ disrupts the stable community and can lead to negative health outcomes. Microbiome composition has been linked to diabetes (REFERENCE), obesity (REFERENCE), other things (REFERENCE). 

We want to know what features of the microbial community confer stability.
